# phac-nml/fetchdatairidanext: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

- `sratools`: Data from the SRA tools step (downloading sequence reads).
- `prefetch`: Reporting of any failed to find or download accessions
- `reads`: The fastq files of downloaded reads.
- `pipeline_info`: information about the pipeline's execution
- `custom`: information on detected/generated NCBI settings used for accessing certain databases (see <https://nf-co.re/modules/custom_sratoolsncbisettings>).

The IRIDA Next-compliant JSON output file will be named `iridanext.output.json.gz` and will be written to the top-level of the results directory. This file is compressed using GZIP and conforms to the [IRIDA Next JSON output specifications](https://github.com/phac-nml/pipeline-standards#42-irida-next-json).

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Read downloads](#read-downloads) - Downloads data from [International Sequence Data Collaboration (INSDC)][https://www.insdc.org/] databases (using NCBI's SRA Tools or fastq-dl).
- [Failed read downloads](#failed-read-downloads) - Generates a CSV of accessions that failed to download
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution
- [IRIDA Next Output](#irida-next-output) - Generates a JSON output file that is compliant with IRIDA Next

### Reads download

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `sratools/`
  - Sequence data in SRA format: `INSDC_ACCESSION/INSDC_ACCESSION.sra`
- `reads/`
  - Reads in fastq format: `INSDC_ACCESSION.fastq.gz` (or alternatively `SAMPLE_NAME_INSDC_ACCESSION.fastq.gz` if `sample_name` provided)

</details>

### Failed read downloads

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `prefetch/failures_report.csv`
  - Sample and accession for reads that failed to download

</details>

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

### IRIDA Next Output

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `/`
  - IRIDA Next-compliant JSON output: `iridanext.output.json.gz`

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
